# Accessing Files From Multiple Machines

## What problem am I trying to solve
I regularly have to fetch a physical external hard drive to copy files to from
my macbook as it has a limited local storage space. Now I've purchased a 
[Framework laptop](https://frame.work/gb/en), I have multple machines I will be
using regularly. I'd like to have easier access to my files so I don't have to 
go and fetch my hard drive every time I want to save a single file.

This will also be a part of a multi-step plan to make sure that my files are all
backed up properly. This doesn't count as a backup itself as it'll be the only
primary copy of my data.

## What is the current process
Prior to owning the Framework, I could manually fetch and connect the external
hard drive to my mac to access the files. This isn't exactly time-consuming, but
it did become a bit of a hassle all the time. When I was at uni, I'd carry the
hard drive around with me as it was the main way I would work on my files, but
since graduating and coming home, I found that I'd access them less, and instead
keep files I accessed reguarly in other locations, spreading things around.

This single hard drive previously would be copied and pasted over to a second 
hard drive as a backup. WHen I was at uni, this would be weekly, but as I would
update what's on there less regularly, this became more of an 'as and when'
process since graduation. 

Now I own multiple machines, I want to improve this process completely as it's
been multiple years since leaving uni and this isn't very safe/secure

## Any requirements
I want to reuse the external hard drives that I own. I also want to make use 
of a raspberry pi 4b I have here.

To consider this project complete, I want to be able to read and write files from
a local network attached storage hosted on the pi. The only major downsides I 
can foresee would be the speed at which these files could be accessed due to 
various factors, but this can be mitigated at a later stage.

## OpenMediaVault
I've previously tried to solve this issue by looking into using OpenMediaVault 
on the aformentioned raspberry pi as it appeared to be close to the Unraid/TrueNAS
software that I'd seen recommended before, but designed to work on ARM chips.

However, after trying it out, I found that that the documentation was lacking
for the latest version and the permissions system was obtuse when it didn't need
to be. I found the UI to be simplistic, yet was hiding features behind unclear
descriptors that were mirrored on the documentation, with no real explanation
as to what they did, or lists of acceptible/common options. For these reasons, 
I didn't feel comfortable continuing to host it as I couldn't reliably reach 
my files. 

## Solution
After some research, I've found that the easiest share to set up is SMB - especially
for future-proffing in case I want to access my files on windows as well in 
the future. I'm going to set up SMB, connect up a formatted hard drive in EXT4
format, and slowly transfer my files back over to there. 

I also want to take this oppertunity to go through all 100k+ files on my backup
to rename them so that they're easier to interact with in a terminal (such as 
removing spaces with underscores and deleting autogenerated files that are no 
longer needed). For this, I've written a short python script that makes this a 
bit easier.

A side effect of this method is that I can also connect to the pi through my 
iPhone and iPad's files app, whih will allow me to access my files on my mobile
devices. However, a downside here is that they will only be accessible when I'm 
at home, instead of being able to carry my hard drive with me. I don't think
this will actually be an issue as I've not needed to access these off-site
since I was back at uni.

### Extending the Solution
Once the pi and all the files are set up within easy access, I also want to use
[all-repos-clone](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos#all-repos-clone-options)
to keep a local backup of my github repos. I don't think that this is _required_,
but would be a useful backup to have.

I can also use the pi itself to run dockerised projects such as piHole or PiVPN
for other functionality - potentially even using the latter to access my files
off-site. However, these are longer term goals and are outside the scope of this
Design document.
